MIG-1620: Virtual machine storage migration (#81461)
openshift/openshift-docs: migration_toolkit_for_containers/mtc-migrating-vms.adoc

[width="100%",cols="15%,15%,70%",options="header"]
|===
|Action
|Supported
|User-initiated steps

|Copy
|Yes
a|
* Create a new persistent volume (PV) in the same namespace.
* Copy data from the source PV to the target PV, and change the VM definition to point to the new PV.
** If you have the `liveMigrate` flag set, the VM migrates live.
** If you do have the `liveMigrate` flag set, the VM shuts down, the source PV contents are copied to the target PV, and the VM is restarted.

|Move
|No
|This action is not supported.
|===

[id="mtc-vm-storage-prerequisites-for-migration_{context}"]
== Prerequisites

Before migrating virtual machine storage, you must install xref:../virt/install/installing-virt.adoc#installing-virt-operator_installing-virt[{VirtProductName} Operator].

To support storage live migration, you need to deploy {VirtProductName} version 4.17. Earlier versions of {VirtProductName} do not support live storage migration.

You also need to configure `KubeVirt` to enable storage live migration according to the xref:../virt/live_migration/virt-configuring-live-migration.adoc#virt-configuring-live-migration-limits_virt-configuring-live-migration[Configuring live migration].

> In {VirtProductName} 4.17.0, not all the required feature gates are enabled. To use the storage live migration feature, you must enable the feature gate. You can enable the feature gate by running the following command:

Author: ```suggestion
In {VirtProductName} 4.17.0, not all the required feature gates are enabled. However, to use the storage live migration feature, you must enable the feature gate. 

Enable the feature gate by running the following command:
```

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc annotate --overwrite -n openshift-cnv hco kubevirt-hyperconverged kubevirt.kubevirt.io/jsonpatch='[ {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumesUpdateStrategy"}, {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumeMigration"} ]'
----

[WARNING]
====
Red{nbsp}Hat does not support clusters with the annotation enabling this feature gate. Do not add this annotation in a production cluster, if you add that annotation you receive a cluster wide alert indicating that your cluster is no longer supported.
====

> To know more about the deployments and custom resource definitions (CRDs) that the migration controller uses to manipulate the VMs, see xref:../migrating_from_ocp_3_to_4/advanced-migration-options-3-4.adoc#migration-controller-options_advanced-migration-options-3-4[Migration controller options].

Author: ```suggestion
For more information about the deployments and custom resource definitions (CRDs) that the migration controller uses to manipulate the VMs, see xref:../migrating_from_ocp_3_to_4/advanced-migration-options-3-4.adoc#migration-controller-options_advanced-migration-options-3-4[Migration controller options].
```

For KubeVirt VMs, the primary use case for VM storage migration is if you want to migrate from one storage class to another. You might migrate VM storage for one of the following reasons:

* You are rebalancing between different storage providers.
* New storage is available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.

:FeatureName: Virtual machine storage migration
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

include::modules/mtc-vm-storage-migration-process-works.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[id="mtc-supported-persistent-volumes-actions-vms_{context}"]
== Supported persistent volume actions

.Supported persistent volume actions
[width="100%",cols="15%,15%,70%",options="header"]
|===
|Action
|Supported
|User-initiated steps

|Copy
|Yes
a|
* Create a new persistent volume (PV) in the same namespace.
* Copy data from the source PV to the target PV, and change the VM definition to point to the new PV.
** If you have the `liveMigrate` flag set, the VM migrates live.
** If you do have the `liveMigrate` flag set, the VM shuts down, the source PV contents are copied to the target PV, and the VM is restarted.

|Move
|No
|This action is not supported.
|===

> include::modules/mtc-vm-storage-migration-process-works.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

Author: ```suggestion
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="mtc-migrating-vms"]
= Migrating virtual machine storage
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: mtc-migrating-vms

toc::[]

You can migrate virtual machine (VM) storage _offline_, when you have the VM turned off, or _online_, when the VM is running.

For KubeVirt VMs, the primary use case for VM storage migration is if you want to migrate from one storage class to another. You might migrate VM storage for one of the following reasons:

* You are rebalancing between different storage providers.
* New storage is available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.

:FeatureName: Virtual machine storage migration
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

[id="mtc-supported-persistent-volumes-actions-vms_{context}"]
== Supported persistent volume actions

.Supported persistent volume actions

> [width="100%",cols="31%,33%,36%",options="header",]

Author: ```suggestion
[width="100%",cols="15%,15%,70%",options="header"]
```

+
In {VirtProductName} 4.17.0, not all the required feature gates are enabled.
+
As a result, you have to enable the feature gate before you can use the storage live migration feature.
+
To work around this, you can use a JSON patch. For example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc annotate --overwrite -n openshift-cnv hco kubevirt-hyperconverged kubevirt.kubevirt.io/jsonpatch='[ {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumesUpdateStrategy"}, {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumeMigration"} ]'
----
+
[WARNING]
====
You should not do this in a production cluster, as it takes the  cluster out of support. Red{nbsp}Hat does not support clusters with this annotation.

> When this annotation is created, you see that there is a warning.

Author: @awels - please could you help clarify?

> When this annotation is created, you see that there is a warning.

Reviewer: When you add that annotation you will get a cluster wide alert indicating that your cluster is no longer supported. I am not 100% sure where that shows up in the UI

====

To know more about deployments and custom resource definitions (CRDs) that are used by the migration controller to manipulate the VMs, see xref:../migrating_from_ocp_3_to_4/advanced-migration-options-3-4.adoc#migration-controller-options_advanced-migration-options-3-4[Migration controller options].

[NOTE]
====

> If the `mig-controller` pod starts before you install {VirtProductName}. The migration controller does not automatically see that you have the {VirtProductName} CustomResourceDefinition (CRD) installed.

Author: ```suggestion
If the `mig-controller` pod starts before you install {VirtProductName}. The migration controller does not automatically see that you have the {VirtProductName} Custom Resource Definition (CRD) installed.
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="mtc-migrating-vms"]

> = Migrating Virtual machine storage

Author: ```suggestion
= Migrating virtual machine storage
```

> include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: Migrating virtual machine storage

:context: mtc-migrating-vms

toc::[]

> {mtc-full} (mtc-short) 1.8.4 supports storage migration for KubeVirt virtual machines (VMs).

Author: ```suggestion
{mtc-full} ({mtc-short}) 1.8.4 supports storage migration for KubeVirt virtual machines (VMs).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: put curly brackets around mtc-short.

The migration can occur offline, when the VM is turned off, or online, when the VM is running.

The main use case for this storage migration for KubeVirt VMs is migration from one storage class to another. For example, if you are rebalancing between different storage providers or if there is new storage available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.

> 

Reviewer 2: maybe a comma before or?

> The main use case for this storage migration for KubeVirt VMs is migration from one storage class to another. For example, if you are rebalancing between different storage providers or if there is new storage available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.

Author: ```suggestion
The main use case for this storage migration for KubeVirt VMs is migration from one storage class to another. For example, if you are rebalancing between different storage providers, or if there is new storage available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.
```

== Supported persistent volume Actions

> 

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: Name the table [.Table name]

> == Supported persistent volume Actions

Author: ```suggestion
== Supported persistent volume actions
```

[width="100%",cols="31%,33%,36%",options="header",]
|===
|Action
|Supported
|Description

|Copy
|Yes
a|
. Create a new persistent volume (PV) in the same namespace.

> . Copy data from source PV to target PV, and modify the VM definition to point to the new PV.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: "from the source PV to the target PV" .

> . Copy data from source PV to target PV, and modify the VM definition to point to the new PV.

Author: ```suggestion
. Copy data from the source PV to the target PV, and modify the VM definition to point to the new PV.
```

> ** If the `liveMigrate` flag is set, the VM live migrate.

Author: ```suggestion
** If the `liveMigrate` flag is set, the VM migrates live.
```

> ** If the `liveMigrate` flag is not set, the VM shuts down, and the source PV contents are copied to the target PV and the VM is restarted.

Reviewer 2: Line 28: Not sure about "live migrate" -- maybe "migrates live" or "migrates immediately".
Line 29; Maybe "...the VM shuts down, the contents of the source PV are copied to the target PV, and the VM is started."

|Move
|No
|This action is not supported.
|===

== Preparing for migration

To prepare for migration, deploy mig-controller and Velero, and then create the following `Mig`' resources on the cluster where the migration controller is running to prepare for migration:

> 

Reviewer 2: suggestions: `mig-controller`  and "the following `mig` resources.." there's an extra character after `Mig` .

. Deploy link:https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/[KubeVirt]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy KubeVirt version 1.3.0 or later. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the link:https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/storage/volume_migration/[Volume Migration].

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 38 tells the reader to "create the following:" , but lines 40 and 42 say "Deploy X and Y". Maybe "create and deploy" in line 38 and remove "deploy" from lines 40 and 42, making them bullets, not procedure steps?

> . Deploy link:https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/[KubeVirt]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy KubeVirt version 1.3.0 or later. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the link:https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/storage/volume_migration/[Volume Migration].

Author: ```suggestion
.Procedure

. Deploy link:https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/[KubeVirt]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy KubeVirt version 1.3.0 or later. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the link:https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/storage/volume_migration/[Volume Migration].
```

. Deploy the link:https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/?tab=readme-ov-file#deploy-it[Containerized Data Importer (CDI)]

These deployments add the appropriate Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) used by the migration controller to manipulate the VMs. For more details, see link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/migrating_from_ocp_3_to_4/advanced-migration-options-3-4.html#migration-controller-options_advanced-migration-options-3-4

[NOTE]
====

> If the mig-controller pod was started before KubeVirt and CDI was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see the CRDs were installed. You have to restart the mig-controller pod after installing KubeVirt and CDI.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: `mig-controller` pod (twice).

The migration can occur offline, when the VM is turned off, or online, when the VM is running.

The main use case for this storage migration for KubeVirt VMs is migration from one storage class to another. For example, if you are rebalancing between different storage providers, or if there is new storage available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.

== Supported persistent volume actions

[width="100%",cols="31%,33%,36%",options="header",]
|===
|Action
|Supported
|Description

|Copy
|Yes
a|
. Create a new persistent volume (PV) in the same namespace.
. Copy data from the source PV to the target PV, and modify the VM definition to point to the new PV.
** If the `liveMigrate` flag is set, the VM migrates live.
** If the `liveMigrate` flag is not set, the VM shuts down, and the source PV contents are copied to the target PV and the VM is restarted.

|Move
|No
|This action is not supported.
|===

== Preparing for migration

To prepare for migration, deploy mig-controller and Velero, and then create the following `Mig`' resources on the cluster where the migration controller is running to prepare for migration:

.Procedure

> . Deploy link:https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/[KubeVirt]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy KubeVirt version 1.3.0 or later. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the link:https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/storage/volume_migration/[Volume Migration].

Reviewer: I mention kubevirt 1.3.0 or later in the U/S documentation. This corresponds to OpenShift Virtualization 4.17 or newer. Might want to say that instead of KubeVirt 1.3.0. But since U/S doesn't know about OCP-V I said KubeVirt there.

I am not sure if there is a link to D/S documentation for storage live migration. For now the U/S version is fine, but once I know there is a D/S version we probably want to change it to the D/S link.

> . Deploy the link:https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/?tab=readme-ov-file#deploy-it[Containerized Data Importer (CDI)]

Reviewer: Don't need to mention this here. CDI and KubeVirt are part of OpenShift Virtualization. So maybe point to the installation instructions for OCP-V here. https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/virt/install/installing-virt.html

Reviewer 3: > So maybe point to the installation instructions for OCP-V here. https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/virt/install/installing-virt.html

@awels , is the use of version-specific (`4.16`) preferred over `latest` which will redirect to the latest available released version -- currently, 4.16?  https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/latest/virt/install/installing-virt.html

Reviewer: No, we should use latest there. I just pointed to one I could find easily.

These deployments add the appropriate Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) used by the migration controller to manipulate the VMs. For more details, see link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/migrating_from_ocp_3_to_4/advanced-migration-options-3-4.html#migration-controller-options_advanced-migration-options-3-4

[NOTE]
====

> If the mig-controller pod was started before KubeVirt and CDI was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see the CRDs were installed. You have to restart the mig-controller pod after installing KubeVirt and CDI.

Author: ```suggestion
If the `mig-controller` pod was started before KubeVirt and CDI was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see the CRDs were installed. You have to restart the `mig-controller` pod after installing KubeVirt and CDI.
```

> If the `mig-controller` pod was started before KubeVirt and CDI was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see the CRDs were installed. You have to restart the `mig-controller` pod after installing KubeVirt and CDI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `mig-controller` pod was started before OpenShift Virtualization was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see that the OpenShift Virtualization CRDs were installed. You have to restart the `mig-controller` pod in the `openshift-migration` namespace, after installing OpenShift Virtualization.
```

> If the `mig-controller` pod was started before KubeVirt and CDI was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see the CRDs were installed. You have to restart the `mig-controller` pod after installing KubeVirt and CDI.

Author: ```suggestion
If the `mig-controller` pod was started before {VirtProductName} was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see that the {VirtProductName} CustomResourceDefinition (CRD) are installed. 

You have to restart the `mig-controller` pod in the `openshift-migration` namespace, after installing OpenShift Virtualization.
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="mtc-migrating-vms"]
= Migrating virtual machine storage
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: mtc-migrating-vms

toc::[]

{mtc-full} ({mtc-short}) 1.8.4 supports storage migration for KubeVirt virtual machines (VMs).

The migration can occur offline, when the VM is turned off, or online, when the VM is running.

The main use case for this storage migration for KubeVirt VMs is migration from one storage class to another. For example, if you are rebalancing between different storage providers, or if there is new storage available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.

== Supported persistent volume actions

> [width="100%",cols="31%,33%,36%",options="header",]

Author: ```suggestion
.Supported persistent volume actions
[width="100%",cols="31%,33%,36%",options="header",]
```

== Supported persistent volume actions

.Supported persistent volume actions
[width="100%",cols="31%,33%,36%",options="header",]
|===
|Action
|Supported
|Description

|Copy
|Yes
a|
. Create a new persistent volume (PV) in the same namespace.
. Copy data from the source PV to the target PV, and modify the VM definition to point to the new PV.
** If the `liveMigrate` flag is set, the VM migrates live.
** If the `liveMigrate` flag is not set, the VM shuts down, and the source PV contents are copied to the target PV and the VM is restarted.

|Move
|No
|This action is not supported.
|===

== Preparing for migration

To prepare for migration, deploy mig-controller and Velero, and then create the following `Mig`' resources on the cluster where the migration controller is running to prepare for migration:

//. Deploy link:https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/[KubeVirt]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy KubeVirt version 1.3.0 or later. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the link:https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/storage/volume_migration/[Volume Migration].

> . Deploy xref:../virt/install/installing-virt.adoc#installing-virt-operator_installing-virt[{VirtProductName}]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy {VirtProductName} version {VirtVersion}. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the xref:../virt/live_migration/virt-configuring-live-migration.html#virt-configuring-live-migration-limits_virt-configuring-live-migration[Configuring live migration].

Author: ```suggestion
. Deploy xref:../virt/install/installing-virt.adoc#installing-virt-operator_installing-virt[{VirtProductName}]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy {VirtProductName} version {VirtVersion}. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the xref:../virt/live_migration/virt-configuring-live-migration.adoc#virt-configuring-live-migration-limits_virt-configuring-live-migration[Configuring live migration].
```

> . Deploy xref:../virt/install/installing-virt.adoc#installing-virt-operator_installing-virt[{VirtProductName}]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy {VirtProductName} version {VirtVersion}. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the xref:../virt/live_migration/virt-configuring-live-migration.adoc#virt-configuring-live-migration-limits_virt-configuring-live-migration[Configuring live migration].

Author: ```suggestion
. Install xref:../virt/install/installing-virt.adoc#installing-virt-operator_installing-virt[{VirtProductName} Operator]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy {VirtProductName} version {VirtVersion}. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the xref:../virt/live_migration/virt-configuring-live-migration.adoc#virt-configuring-live-migration-limits_virt-configuring-live-migration[Configuring live migration].

+
In {VirtProductName} 4.17.0 not all the required feature gates are enabled. 
As a result, you have to enable the feature gate before being able to use the storage live migration feature.
To work around this, you can use a JSON patch:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc annotate --overwrite -n openshift-cnv hco kubevirt-hyperconverged kubevirt.kubevirt.io/jsonpatch='[ {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumesUpdateStrategy"}, {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumeMigration"} ]'
----
+
[WARNING] 
====
This should not be done in a production cluster, as it will take the  cluster out of support, as Red Hat does not support clusters with this annotation. A warning will be fired by the creation of this annotation.
====
```

> . Install the xref:../virt/install/installing-virt.adoc#installing-virt-operator_installing-virt[{VirtProductName} Operator].

Author: ```suggestion
```

> . Deploy the link:https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/?tab=readme-ov-file#deploy-it[Containerized Data Importer (CDI)]

Author: ```suggestion
. Install the xref:../virt/install/installing-virt.adoc#installing-virt-operator_installing-virt[{VirtProductName} Operator].
```

[NOTE]
====
If the mig-controller pod was started before KubeVirt and CDI was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see the CRDs were installed. You have to restart the mig-controller pod after installing KubeVirt and CDI.
====

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]
|===
|Resource |Purpose
|`MigCluster`
|Represents the cluster to use when doing the storage migration

|`StorageClass`
|The storage class, there should be at least two

|`VirtualMachine`
|A virtual machine definition, installed by KubeVirt

|`VirtualMachineInstance`
|A running virtual machine, installed by KubeVirt

|`DataVolume`
|A definition on how to populate a Persistent Volume with a virtual machine disk, installed by CDI
|===

include::modules/mtc-deploying-a-vm.adoc[leveloffset=+2]

include::modules/mtc-vm-creating-mig-plan.adoc[leveloffset=+2]

include::modules/mtc-migrating-vms-known-issues.adoc[leveloffset=+2]

> // == Deploying a Virtual Machine
> 
> // == Creating a migration plan
> 
> // === Current known limitations
> 
> // ==== Online migration limitations
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

+
In {VirtProductName} 4.17.0, not all the required feature gates are enabled.
As a result, you have to enable the feature gate before being able to use the storage live migration feature.
+
To work around this, you can use a JSON patch:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc annotate --overwrite -n openshift-cnv hco kubevirt-hyperconverged kubevirt.kubevirt.io/jsonpatch='[ {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumesUpdateStrategy"}, {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumeMigration"} ]'
----
+
[WARNING]
====
This should not be done in a production cluster, as it takes the  cluster out of support, as Red Hat does not support clusters with this annotation.

When this annotation is created, a warning is given.
====

> These deployments add the appropriate Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) used by the migration controller to manipulate the VMs. For more details, see xref:../migrating_from_ocp_3_to_4/advanced-migration-options-3-4.html#migration-controller-options_advanced-migration-options-3-4[Migration controller options].

Author: ```suggestion
These deployments add the appropriate Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) used by the migration controller to manipulate the VMs. For more details, see xref:../migrating_from_ocp_3_to_4/advanced-migration-options-3-4.adoc#migration-controller-options_advanced-migration-options-3-4[Migration controller options].
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="mtc-migrating-vms"]
= Migrating virtual machine storage
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: mtc-migrating-vms

toc::[]

The migration can occur offline, when the VM is turned off, or online, when the VM is running.

The main use case for this storage migration for KubeVirt VMs is migration from one storage class to another. For example, if you are rebalancing between different storage providers or if there is new storage available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.

:FeatureName: Virtual machine storage migration
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

> == Supported persistent volume actions

Author: ```suggestion
[id="mtc-supported-persistent-volumes-actions-vms"]
== Supported persistent volume actions
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="mtc-migrating-vms"]
= Migrating virtual machine storage
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: mtc-migrating-vms

toc::[]

> The migration can occur offline, when the VM is turned off, or online, when the VM is running.

Author: ```suggestion
The migration can occur offline, when the VM is turned off. It can also occur online, when the VM is running.
```

> The main use case for this storage migration for KubeVirt VMs is migration from one storage class to another. For example, if you are rebalancing between different storage providers or if there is new storage available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.

Author: ```suggestion
For KubeVirt virtual machines (VMs), the primary use case for VM storage migration is migration from one storage class to another. For example, you might migrate VM storage if you are rebalancing between different storage providers or if there is new storage available that is better suited to the workload running inside the VM.
```

:FeatureName: Virtual machine storage migration
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

[id="mtc-supported-persistent-volumes-actions-vms"]
== Supported persistent volume actions

.Supported persistent volume actions
[width="100%",cols="31%,33%,36%",options="header",]
|===
|Action
|Supported

> |Description

Author: ```suggestion
|User-initiated steps
```

|Copy
|Yes
a|
. Create a new persistent volume (PV) in the same namespace.
. Copy data from the source PV to the target PV, and modify the VM definition to point to the new PV.
** If the `liveMigrate` flag is set, the VM migrates live.
** If the `liveMigrate` flag is not set, the VM shuts down, the source PV contents are copied to the target PV, and the VM is restarted.

|Move
|No
|This action is not supported.
|===

> [id="mtc-vm-storage-preparing-for-migration"]
> == Preparing for migration

Author: ```suggestion
[id="mtc-vm-storage-prerquisites-for-migration"]
== Prerquisites
```

> To prepare for migration, deploy mig-controller and Velero, and then create the following `mig` resources on the cluster where the migration controller is running to prepare for migration:

Author: ```suggestion
Before migrating virtual machine storage, the following prerequisites must be met: 
```

. Install xref:../virt/install/installing-virt.adoc#installing-virt-operator_installing-virt[{VirtProductName} Operator]. In order to support storage live migration, you need to deploy {VirtProductName} version {VirtVersion}. Earlier versions do not support storage live migration. You also need to configure KubeVirt to enable storage live migration according to the xref:../virt/live_migration/virt-configuring-live-migration.adoc#virt-configuring-live-migration-limits_virt-configuring-live-migration[Configuring live migration].

+

> In {VirtProductName} 4.17.0 not all the required feature gates are enabled. 

Author: ```suggestion
In {VirtProductName} 4.17.0 not all the required feature gates are enabled.
```

----
+
[WARNING]
====
This should not be done in a production cluster, as it takes the  cluster out of support. Red{nbsp}Hat does not support clusters with this annotation.

When this annotation is created, a warning is given.
====

These deployments add the appropriate Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) used by the migration controller to manipulate the VMs. For more details, see xref:../migrating_from_ocp_3_to_4/advanced-migration-options-3-4.adoc#migration-controller-options_advanced-migration-options-3-4[Migration controller options].

[NOTE]
====
If the `mig-controller` pod was started before {VirtProductName} was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see that the {VirtProductName} CustomResourceDefinition (CRD) is installed.

You have to restart the `mig-controller` pod in the `openshift-migration` namespace after installing OpenShift Virtualization.
====

> [width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]

Reviewer: The point of this table is to indicate that in order to do storage live migrations, you have to have OCP Virtualization installed. As well as the normal MTC CRDs and at least two storage classes.

+
To work around this, you can use a JSON patch:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc annotate --overwrite -n openshift-cnv hco kubevirt-hyperconverged kubevirt.kubevirt.io/jsonpatch='[ {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumesUpdateStrategy"}, {"op": "add", "path": "/spec/configuration/developerConfiguration/featureGates/-", "value": "VolumeMigration"} ]'
----
+
[WARNING]
====
This should not be done in a production cluster, as it takes the  cluster out of support. Red{nbsp}Hat does not support clusters with this annotation.

When this annotation is created, a warning is given.
====

These deployments add the appropriate Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) used by the migration controller to manipulate the VMs. For more details, see xref:../migrating_from_ocp_3_to_4/advanced-migration-options-3-4.adoc#migration-controller-options_advanced-migration-options-3-4[Migration controller options].

[NOTE]
====
If the `mig-controller` pod was started before {VirtProductName} was installed, the migration controller does not automatically see that the {VirtProductName} CustomResourceDefinition (CRD) is installed.

> You have to restart the `mig-controller` pod in the `openshift-migration` namespace after installing OpenShift Virtualization.

Author: ```suggestion
You have to restart the `mig-controller` pod in the `openshift-migration` namespace after installing  {VirtProductName}.

The following table exaplains that to use storage live migrations, you need to have {VirtProductName} installed. Also, you must use {mtc-short} Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) and at least two storage classes. 
```

The following table explains that to use storage live migrations, you need to have {VirtProductName} installed. Moreover, you must use {mtc-short} CRDs and at least two storage classes. 

.Storage live migration requirements 
[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]
|===
|Resource |Purpose
|`MigCluster`
|Represents the cluster to use when migrating the storage.

|`StorageClass`
|The storage class, ensure there are at least two storage classes.

|`VirtualMachine`
|A virtual machine definition, installed by KubeVirt.

|`VirtualMachineInstance`
|A running virtual machine, installed by KubeVirt.

|`DataVolume`
|A definition on how to populate a persistent volume (PV) with a VM disk, installed by Containerized Data Importer (CDI).
|===

> include::modules/mtc-deploying-a-vm.adoc[leveloffset=+2]

Author: ```suggestion
include::modules/mtc-deploying-a-vm.adoc[leveloffset=+1]
```

> include::modules/mtc-vm-creating-mig-plan.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
> 
> include::modules/mtc-migrating-vms-known-issues.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
> 
> include::modules/mtc-vm-storage-migration-process-works.adoc[leveloffset=+2]

Author: ```suggestion
include::modules/mtc-vm-creating-mig-plan.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::modules/mtc-migrating-vms-known-issues.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::modules/mtc-vm-storage-migration-process-works.adoc[leveloffset=+1]
```
